DOCSP-45357 Sharding Configuration (#76)
mongodb/docs-mongoid: source/configuration/sharding.txt

.. _mongoid-sharding-configuration:

======================
Sharding Configuration
======================

.. facet::
   :name: genre
   :values: reference

.. meta::
   :keywords: ruby framework, odm, code example
.. contents:: On this page
   :local:
   :backlinks: none
   :depth: 2
   :class: singlecol

Overview
--------

Sharding is a way to distribute your data across multiple machines. MongoDB
uses sharding to support deployments with large data sets and high
throughput operations. In this guide, you can learn how to configure sharding in
your {+odm+} application.

Declare Shard keys
------------------

> MongoDB uses shard keys to distribute a collection's documents across
> shards. A shard key consists of one or more fields in a document. In your

Reviewer: S: i like the manual's explanation of shard keys. might be worth incorporating

https://www.mongodb.com/docs/manual/core/sharding-shard-key/

```suggestion
MongoDB uses shard keys to distribute a collection's documents across
shards. A shard key is an indexed field, or multiple fields covered by a
compound index, that determines the distribution of the collection's
documents among the cluster's shards. In your
```

Author: I stole mine from a different page in the manual, but agreed this one is better

{+odm+} application, you can declare a shard key when you create a model by
using the ``shard_key`` macro.

The following example creates a ``Person`` class with a shard key on the
``ssn`` field:

.. literalinclude:: /includes/configuration/sharding.rb
   :language: ruby
   :start-after: # start-shard-key
   :end-before: # end-shard-key
   :emphasize-lines: 6

.. note::

   To shard a collection, the collection must have an index that starts with the

>    shard key. You can use {+odm+}'s index management functionality to create the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   shard key. You can use {+odm+}'s index-management functionality to create the
```

   index. To learn more about index management with {+odm+}, see the :ref:`Index
   Management <mongoid-indexes>` guide.

> If a model declares a shard key, {+odm+} expects the respective collection to be
> sharded with the specified shard key. When {+odm+} reloads models, it provides

Reviewer: S: 'respective' feels vague. 'containing collection'? 'collection that contains the shard key'? 'sharded collection'?

```suggestion
If a model declares a shard key, {+odm+} expects the sharded collection
to use the declared key for sharding. When {+odm+} reloads models, it provides
```

> the shard key with the ``_id`` field to the ``find`` command to improve query

Reviewer: Q: how does a shard key have an _id field? i thought the shard key was a field...?

Author: Clarified this. It sends the shard key along with the model's _id field

performance. If the collection is not sharded with the specified shard key,
queries might not return the expected results.

> You can declare shard keys by using either the standard MongoDB

Reviewer: q: does the manual call these 'standard' and 'shorthand' syntaxes? if not, maybe 'full syntax' or something similar would be more accurate. applies throughout.

syntax, or by using a shorthand syntax.

Standard Syntax
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The standard syntax follows the format
of the ``mongosh`` :manual:`shardCollection()
</reference/method/sh.shardCollection>` method, and allows you to specify the
following types of shard keys:

- Ranged keys
- Hashed keys
- Compound keys

The standard syntax also allows you to specify collection and sharding options.

The following example creates a shard key on the ``ssn`` field in each of the

> preceding formats:

Reviewer: q: what are the formats?

Author: I was originally calling the shard-key types "shard key formats" but changed it, so I just missed changing it here.

.. literalinclude:: /includes/configuration/sharding.rb
   :language: ruby
   :start-after: # start-shard-key-formats
   :end-before: # end-shard-key-formats

Shorthand Syntax
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The shorthand syntax allows you to declare a shard key by specifying only the
field name. This syntax supports only ranged and compound shard keys, and does not allow you
to specify collection or sharding options.

The following example creates a ranged and a compound shard key:

.. literalinclude:: /includes/configuration/sharding.rb
   :language: ruby
   :start-after: # start-shard-key-shorthand
   :end-before: # end-shard-key-shorthand

Specify Associated and Embedded Fields

> ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Reviewer: S: this is placed as a sibling heading of standard/shorthand syntax, which sort of suggests it's a third alternative to those. i'm guessing that's not the case? if not, you could take standard/shorthand out of their own subheadings and just put them under a single heading called 'Syntax' or something.

You can specify a shard key on a ``belongs_to`` association in place of a field
name. When doing so, {+odm+} creates the shard key on the primary key of the
associated collection.

The following example creates a shard key on the ``belongs_to`` association in a
``Person`` model. Because the associated ``country`` collection has a primary
key called ``country_id``, {+odm+} shards by that field:

.. literalinclude:: /includes/configuration/sharding.rb
   :language: ruby
   :start-after: # start-shard-key-association
   :end-before: # end-shard-key-association

You can specify a shard key on an embedded document by using dot notation to
delimit the field names. The following example creates a shard key on the
``address.city`` field:

.. literalinclude:: /includes/configuration/sharding.rb
   :language: ruby
   :start-after: # start-shard-key-embedded
   :end-before: # end-shard-key-embedded

.. note::

>    Because the ``.`` character is used to delimit embedded fields, {+odm+} does

Reviewer: S:

```suggestion
   Because the period (``.``) character is used to delimit embedded fields, {+odm+} does
```

>    not support creating shard keys on fields with names that contain the ``.``
>    character.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   not support creating shard keys on fields with names that contain a period.
```

Sharding Management Rake Tasks
------------------------------

> You can shard collections in your database according the the shard keys defined

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can shard collections in your database according to the shard keys defined
```

> in your {+odm+} models by running the ``db:mongoid:shard_collections`` Rake

Reviewer: I: all the [docs](https://www.mongodb.com/docs/mongoid/current/reference/indexes/) i could find use lowercase-r 'rake'

```suggestion
in your {+odm+} models by running the ``db:mongoid:shard_collections`` rake
```

applies throughout

task. To ensure that the collections contain indexes that start with the shard
key, you can first run the ``db:mongoid:create_indexes`` Rake task.

Run the following Rake commands to create the indexes and shard the collections
based on your model's shard keys:

.. code-block:: bash

   rake db:mongoid:create_indexes
   rake db:mongoid:shard_collections

Index management and sharding rake tasks do not stop when they encounter an
error with a particular model class. Instead, they log the error and continue
processing the next model. To ensure the rake tasks did not encounter any

> errors, check the output of {+odm+} logger configured for your application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
errors, check the output of the {+odm+} logger configured for your application.
```

.. note::

   When performing schema-related operations in a sharded cluster, nodes might

>    have out of date local configuration-related cache data. To clear the caches,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   contain out-of-date local configuration-related cache data. To clear the caches,
```

if the cache data is related to local configurations (as opposed to being local data that's related to configurations), there should be a hyphen between 'local' and 'configuration' too.

https://www.mongodb.com/docs/meta/style-guide/style/punctuation/#hyphens-in-compound-modifiers

Author: I think it's local data that's configuration related

   run the :manual:`flushRouterConfig </reference/command/flushRouterConfig/>`
   command on each ``mongos`` node.

API Documentation
-----------------

> To learn more about any of the ``shard_key`` macro discussed in this

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To learn more about any of the ``shard_key`` macros discussed in this
```

your {+odm+} application.

Declare Shard keys
------------------

MongoDB uses shard keys to distribute a collection's documents across
shards. A shard key is an indexed field, or multiple fields covered by a
compound index, that determines the distribution of the collection's
documents among the cluster's shards. In your
{+odm+} application, you can declare a shard key by
using the ``shard_key`` macro when you create a model.

The following example creates a ``Person`` class with a shard key on the
``ssn`` field:

.. literalinclude:: /includes/configuration/sharding.rb
   :language: ruby
   :start-after: # start-shard-key
   :end-before: # end-shard-key
   :emphasize-lines: 6

.. note::

   To shard a collection, the collection must have an index that starts with the
   shard key. The index can be on only the shard key, or it can be a compound index
   where the shard key is the prefix. You can use {+odm+}'s index-management
   functionality to create the index. To learn more about index management with
   {+odm+}, see the :ref:`Index Management <mongoid-indexes>` guide.

If a model declares a shard key, {+odm+} expects the sharded collection to

> use that declared key for sharding. When {+odm+} reloads models, it provides

Reviewer: nit

```suggestion
use the declared key for sharding. When {+odm+} reloads models, it provides
```

the shard key along with the ``_id`` field to the ``find`` command to improve query
performance. If the collection is not sharded with the specified shard key,
queries might not return the expected results.

Syntax
~~~~~~

You can declare shard keys by using either the full MongoDB

> syntax, or by using a shorthand syntax.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
syntax or by using a shorthand syntax.
```
